# <a id="_blw8rdnjj46q"></a>Meeting WG Ontology Harmonization and Mapping

# <a id="_hsav6x7l4sht"></a>9\.12\.2022 11 am CET

Participants \(please add yourself\)

1. Aenne Löhden \(DKRZ\)
2. Arnost Stanzel \(BSB, 4Memory\)
3. Claus Weiland
4. Christian Bölling
5. David Linke \(LIKAT, NFDI4Cat\)
6. Giacomo Lanza \(PTB, Braunschweig\)
7. Hendrik Borgelt \(TU Do, NFDI4Cat\)
8. Jakob Voß \(VZG, NFDI4Objects\)
9. Luca Ghiringhelli \(FAIRmat\)
10. Marie Annisius
11. Mark Dörr
12. Matthias Löbe
13. Michael Finkel
14. Naouel Karam \(InfAI/Fraunhofer, NFDI4Biodiv\)
15. Oliver Koepler
16. Philipp Jordt \(Daphne\)
17. Raphael Ritz \(FAIRmat; B4N\)
18. Richard Lenz \(FAU, NFDI4CAT\)
19. Roman Baum \(ZB MED\)
20. Steffen Neumann
21. Taras Petrenko
22. Thorsten Trippel

## <a id="_1x2qplrrw6mz"></a>Agenda \(on\-the\-fly\)

- Short report from sections, section\-workgroup and base4nfdi workshop from 7 december
	- Meeting on Terminology Services on 2022\-12\-13 \(incl Zoom Link\)

[Terminology Services @ NFDI](https://docs.google.com/spreadsheets/d/1jLXHNuDKbGQBIWds5lDuNKj-GHIqHluEpfF5so5nF8g/edit#gid=908635141)

- 
	- Slides of Meeting last Wendesday: [Workshop Sektionen \- Basisdienste\.pptx](https://docs.google.com/presentation/d/19bIl4Btu5FNWH3CbstzKCHUYfZtS9Kj4/edit) 

## <a id="_6ed7bkz3ydit"></a>Next steps

- Invite members of the WG or from the consortia to present the ongoing and future plans with regards to ontologies
- Invite for a january meeting
- As an example in NFDI4Chem we did an overview of ontologies: [https://doi\.org/10\.1515/pac\-2021\-2007](https://doi.org/10.1515/pac-2021-2007)
	- __Roman will create a spreadsheet for used ontologies in the different consortia__
	- __can you provide a very short overview for a next Meeting in January__
	- __ of ontologies discussed, reused, in development from your Consortia / Domains?__
- In NFDI4Cat we also collected the most relevant ones: [Ontology collection – NFDI4Cat](https://nfdi4cat.org/en/services/ontology-collection/) \(more info only in internal docs\)
- Case statement on Ontology Harmonization   
[https://doi\.org/10\.5281/zenodo\.6726518](https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.6726518)
- Simple Standard for Sharing Ontological Mappings \(SSSOM\) [https://mapping\-commons\.github\.io/sssom/spec/](https://mapping-commons.github.io/sssom/spec/) 
- we should have a new meeting in January after the holidays
	- possible topics:
		- spreadsheet of used ontologies, including information about:
			- upper level ontologies they are based on
			- If they are developed within the consortia
		- mapping between ontologies
		- short overview about the ts proposal
		- overview of relevant ontology/mapping activities within the NFDI consortia – as well as worldwide
		- \(Practical\) Use Cases for the Terminology Service
		- …

