<a id="_5l7hdhn1spdj"></a>2023\-05\-23 \- WG Ontology Mapping & Harmonisation

**Date & Time**: 2023\-05\-23 \- 11\-12 CET

**Meeting Link:**

[https://tib\-eu\.webex\.com/tib\-eu\-en/j\.php?MTID=mcd77c9718249ee0fdde541ee7e5b6c88](https://tib-eu.webex.com/tib-eu-en/j.php?MTID=mcd77c9718249ee0fdde541ee7e5b6c88)

**Ressources:**

- Link to GDrive workspace:
  [WG Ontology Harmonization and Mapping](https://drive.google.com/drive/folders/1hLgFgzp0cS_Pi8hpI9zOD7DcY3SUXRNH)
- [Used Ontologies @ NFDI](https://docs.google.com/spreadsheets/d/1UAfDKo2gKiaFldEeitMUcO8Gl1Fjyb_r_bp1V4JW0Es/edit#gid=0)

**Main Topic:**

- Discussing the used ontologies in NFDI based on our worksheet
- Planning next steps, todos & deliverables
- see also **Evaluate & Discuss** section in
  [Overview \- WG Ontology Harmonization & Mapping Meetings](https://docs.google.com/document/d/14z6kuAdVaiflWUtjqk3LKt-hqg_DeaRCpLY7TFo1PoU/edit#heading=h.wxo1hvspo7kn)

# <a id="_4in35gwl6myp"></a>Participants

- Marc Fuhrmans \(NFDI4Ing\)
- Dorothea Iglezakis \(NFDI4Ing, MaRDI\)
- Hendrik Borgelt \(NFDI4Cat\)
- Noemi Betancort \(KonsortSWD, U Bremen\)
- Kathryn Dumschott \(NFDI4plants\)
- Philip Str�mert \(NFDI4Chem\)
- Jakob Vo� \(NFDI4Objects\)
- Oliver Koepler \(NFDI4Chem\)
- J�rg Waitelonis \(FIZ Karlsruhe,

# <a id="_3cakx2qk2ogo"></a>Agenda

**discussed aspect of main topic**

**prepared or present by **

How do we analyze which ontologies are used or needed in which consortia and
compile this into an overview ressource for documentation?

Planning next steps with regard to our
[objectives](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1GUh7K0Sy8tyrKZ4-BEizb-9Qa0tt3uzE/edit#heading=h.wj2xmb4q8ovw)

# <a id="_71znd1hi3viy"></a>Notes

- let�s please always put our names in the participants list

improving our overview of the used terminologies

- [Used Ontologies @ NFDI](https://docs.google.com/spreadsheets/d/1UAfDKo2gKiaFldEeitMUcO8Gl1Fjyb_r_bp1V4JW0Es/edit#gid=0)
  - Is there a chance to harvest Terminology Service APIs to gather all
    terminologies used by TS XY and auto\-generate some stats, visualizations?
  - so far we have 16 consortia represented
  - ACTION ITEM: get one contact per consortium who is responsible to provide
    information on which terminology is used
  - we need a color coded matrix of all consortia and their application of
    terminologies and more
    - make spreadsheet?: rows consortia, columns contact person 1/2/3, role
      description of contact person
      - [Overview tab in "Used Ontologies @ NFDI" spreadsheet](https://docs.google.com/spreadsheets/d/1UAfDKo2gKiaFldEeitMUcO8Gl1Fjyb_r_bp1V4JW0Es/)
    - we also agreed to make a slide deck for future reference in which each
      consortium can add which terminologies are used for which entities based
      kind of on the below linked matrix:
      - first draft:
        [Terminologies used in NFDI](https://docs.google.com/presentation/d/1wD8R_nU4UvC4_ZD7Q68H0YARhJSvfU4QfPZ6Cu2QvtM/edit#slide=id.g24a29273fda_0_0)
      - more complex matrix can then be made from this at a later stage
- regards specific task from WG charter: �Identify and prioritize concrete needs
  for mappings across terminologies and/or knowledge graphs, by working groups
  staffed by all the involved consortia\.�
- What are the next steps once experts in the consortia are identified? - how to
  get feedback from these �experts�, set of concrete questions? - invite experts
  to WG meeting to present their work \(5 min impulses\)  
  Provide 3 questions to be addressed in the presentation - sort of open format
  might be easier - topic intro proposal: - We use terminologies/ontologies for
  � - ask for a list of aspects that are addressed by terminologies - which
  terminologies are used where exactly, for what use cases \(e\.g\. to annotate
  the data sets ingested into open repositories\)? - J�rg: What kind of data do
  you have and how do you describe it, in terms of what schemas and CVs or
  keywords are used - Dorothea: Which objects, artifacts or entities are to be
  described, the processes generating research data, the - Results from workshop
  [https://bwsyncandshare\.kit\.edu/s/ky2LDDBCLCmDzCb](https://bwsyncandshare.kit.edu/s/ky2LDDBCLCmDzCb) -
  [Matrix](https://docs.google.com/spreadsheets/d/14NppjHh7sIo4Weo7kgYhARjFF4iVlYTQnVzovk3doj0/edit#gid=1826354375)
  of research objects, methods and tools from a workshop before NFDI started -
  idea of slide deck for such a short presentation on what entities are
  described with what terminologies for each consortium
