<a id="_5l7hdhn1spdj"></a>2023\-08\-09 \- WG Ontology Mapping & Harmonisation

__Date & Time__: 2023\-08\-09 \- 11\-12 CET

 

__Meeting Link:__

[https://tib\-eu\.webex\.com/tib\-eu\-en/j\.php?MTID=mcd77c9718249ee0fdde541ee7e5b6c88](https://tib-eu.webex.com/tib-eu-en/j.php?MTID=mcd77c9718249ee0fdde541ee7e5b6c88) 

__Ressources:__

- Link to GDrive workspace: [WG Ontology Harmonization and Mapping](https://drive.google.com/drive/folders/1hLgFgzp0cS_Pi8hpI9zOD7DcY3SUXRNH) 
- [Used Ontologies @ NFDI](https://docs.google.com/spreadsheets/d/1UAfDKo2gKiaFldEeitMUcO8Gl1Fjyb_r_bp1V4JW0Es/edit#gid=0)
- [Overview \- WG Ontology Harmonization & Mapping Meetings](https://docs.google.com/document/d/14z6kuAdVaiflWUtjqk3LKt-hqg_DeaRCpLY7TFo1PoU/edit)

__Main Topic:__ 

- upcoming CORDI presentation preparation
- what to do in the next calls and who will prepare what

# <a id="_4in35gwl6myp"></a>Participants

__Name__

__NFDI project affiliation\(s\)__

Jakob Voß

NFDI4Objects, N\.A\.

Philip Strömert

NFDI4Chem, N\.A\.

Noemi Betancort

KonsortSWD, N\.A\.

Holger Israel

 N\.A\.

Kathryn Dumschott

DataPLANT, N\.A\.

Cord Wiljes

Base4NFDI, N\.A\.

# <a id="_3cakx2qk2ogo"></a>Agenda

__discussed aspect of main topic__

__prepared or present by __

# <a id="_71znd1hi3viy"></a>Notes

- upcoming CORDI presentation preparation
	- submitted abstract[CORDI 2023 \- Finding a common ground for NFDI terminologies](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1Y8BiM8czU9RMfFQY6v5HKXMNI9IKmQaFsA3FdXTW_5k/edit#heading=h.htr67yedhcw)
	- ontology use analysis started in [NFDI\_harmONTOmap\_analysis\.ipynb](https://drive.google.com/file/d/16KX6M7Ysmx787Jdnl_CagJvP1k8_4PYq/view?usp=drive_link)
		- needed questions
			- which upper & mid level ontologies are used?
				- check which are using: RO, BFO, OBI, IAO, PATO, PROV, CIDOC, TIME, SOSA, EMMO, I\-Adapt, Schema\.org, Dublin Core, Spar\-Ontologies?
			- which consortia use BFO/PROV/CIDOC/TLO aligned ontologies?
			- which are the most shared \(domain\) ontologies between all consortia \(apart from the TLOs\)?
			- __need to add new clumn for the type of semantic artifact: owl/skos/undefined to be able to analyse which are mapable \(=owl|skos, as other formats are ignored by us for now\)__
			- license analysis: which are open and …
			- list/analyse number of which ontologies of “same/similar” domain are used through which consortia
	- Naouel will do slides for the I\-Adopt part, we need help with the slides for the WG presentation & Ontology analysis part
- what to do in the next calls and who will prepare what
	- 22\.08\. we’ll continue to talk about the analysis of the used ontologies
	- 12\.09\. will be cancled due to CORDI and another Humanities conference happening at the same time
	- RE our charter Objective: *Suggest recommendations on mapping tools, mapping creation, mapping validation, mapping documentation, and mapping publishing \(e\.g\., on the Terminology Service\)*
		- 26\.09\. Jakob will present JSKOS/COCODA as implementation example of parts of this objective \(to be confirmed if it will really be on that day or maybe in a later call\)
		- As a response to Philip asking in the OBO\-Slack SSSOM channel, if anyone could present how SSSOM is currently used for data integration and/or ontology mapping/alignment\. Charles Hoyt replied: “I am happy to give a talk on Biomappings, which goes one step further in analyzing what are the gaps and how to fill them in mappings between ontologies and other terminologies\. “ <\- might be quite domain specific already, but seems good nevertheless to get a better understanding about how SSSOM is used in the wild\.
		- TODO: It seems best if someone from our WG could go over the [SSSOM docs](https://mapping-commons.github.io/sssom/) and subsequently present shortly in how far this framework compares to the JSKOS/COCODA framework and how it can/might/should be used to address this objective\.
	- We need to improve the organization of our WG in terms of preparing and evaluating our calls and todos\. All our ressources are limited and we need to better divide the work between each WG member to get things done ;\)

