<a id="_5l7hdhn1spdj"></a>2023\-06\-27 \- WG Ontology Mapping & Harmonisation

__Date & Time__: 2023\-06\-27 \- 11\-12 CET

 

__Meeting Link:__

[https://tib\-eu\.webex\.com/tib\-eu\-en/j\.php?MTID=mcd77c9718249ee0fdde541ee7e5b6c88](https://tib-eu.webex.com/tib-eu-en/j.php?MTID=mcd77c9718249ee0fdde541ee7e5b6c88) 

__Ressources:__

- Link to GDrive workspace: [WG Ontology Harmonization and Mapping](https://drive.google.com/drive/folders/1hLgFgzp0cS_Pi8hpI9zOD7DcY3SUXRNH) 
- [Used Ontologies @ NFDI](https://docs.google.com/spreadsheets/d/1UAfDKo2gKiaFldEeitMUcO8Gl1Fjyb_r_bp1V4JW0Es/edit#gid=0)
- [Overview \- WG Ontology Harmonization & Mapping Meetings](https://docs.google.com/document/d/14z6kuAdVaiflWUtjqk3LKt-hqg_DeaRCpLY7TFo1PoU/edit)

__Main Topic:__ xxx

# <a id="_4in35gwl6myp"></a>Participants

__Name__

__NFDI project affiliation\(s\)__

Philip Strömert

NFDI4Chem, N\.A\.

Jakob Voß

NFDI4Objects, N\.A\.

Mehtap Özaslan

NFDI4Cat, DAPHNE4NFDI

Kathryn Dumschott

DataPLANT, N\.A\.

Dorothea Iglezakis

NFDI4Ing, MaRDI

Marc Fuhrmans

NFDI4Ing, N\.A\.

Roman Baum

NFDI4Health, N\.A\.

Hendrik Borgelt

NFDI4Cat, N\.A\.

Base4NFDI, N\.A\.

Base4NFDI, N\.A\.

# <a id="_3cakx2qk2ogo"></a>Agenda Notes

- report sent away 
- State of BARTOC 2023\. Virtual BARTOC Editors Meeting [https://doi\.org/10\.5281/zenodo\.8069920](https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.8069920) 
	- new funding end of the year, relations between ontologies and terminologies planned
	- Jakob is editor and can be asked for changes and editing rights
- NFDI4Objects
	- uses CIDOC CRM for the upper level and uses the LIDO data format
- Which entities and their characteristics are the same throughout all NFDI?
	- We need to find out which entities need to be represented throughout all NFDI consortia that are not describing the domain specific research data but only the common general domain entities needed in the description of research data\.
		- It is still unclear how we can best find out such common entities/properties
		- As suggested in previous calls and our submission to CoRDI, one approach could be to use the I\-ADOPT framework to at least describe research variables in a common way\.
		- Could the [NFDI4Culture ontology](https://nfdi4culture.de/ontology) be a useful grounding framework for that?
- re: our overview of [Used Ontologies @ NFDI](https://docs.google.com/spreadsheets/d/1UAfDKo2gKiaFldEeitMUcO8Gl1Fjyb_r_bp1V4JW0Es/edit#gid=0)
	- We decided to write to the contacts gathered in there to announce that each consortium has the chance to enter their reused/developed terminologies into their spreadsheet until the 31\.7\.2023, so we have enough time to then start with our analysis\. 
	- Emphasis discussed: Only those terminologies need to be listed in there, which are actually reused or being developed\. Those that are merely index or evaluated are not part of the analysis\.
- Philip: asks Oliver and Felix regarding analytics of used ontologies 
	- So far our analytics do not track fine grained enough information to determine who s using the TS in what kind of settings\. 
- __We need to prepare the following tasks/topics for the next calls \(taken from our charter\) \-> your help is needed:__
	- Assessment of existing approaches to achieve “cross\-domain knowledge sharing”, e\.g\., minimum common metadata schemas
	- Define minimum information standard for NFDI data publications required for semantic interoperability
	- Identify and prioritize concrete needs for mappings across terminologies and/or knowledge graphs, by working groups staffed by all the involved consortia\.
		- should be based on the analysis of [Used Ontologies @ NFDI](https://docs.google.com/spreadsheets/d/1UAfDKo2gKiaFldEeitMUcO8Gl1Fjyb_r_bp1V4JW0Es/edit#gid=0), which has to be done first
	- Suggest recommendations on mapping tools, mapping creation, mapping validation, mapping documentation, and mapping publishing \(e\.g\., on the Terminology Service\)
		- we should plan to have presentations after summer about: SSSOM, JSKOS/COCODA, talking about best practices on how to release mapping/alignment artifacts, 
		- WG TS will present something relevant to this in our WG as well

