<a id="_5l7hdhn1spdj"></a>2023\-06\-14 \- WG Ontology Mapping & Harmonisation

Date & Time: 2023\-06\-14 \- 11\-12 CET

**Meeting Link:**

[https://tib\-eu\.webex\.com/tib\-eu\-en/j\.php?MTID=mcd77c9718249ee0fdde541ee7e5b6c88](https://tib-eu.webex.com/tib-eu-en/j.php?MTID=mcd77c9718249ee0fdde541ee7e5b6c88)

**Resources:**

- Link to GDrive workspace:
  [WG Ontology Harmonization and Mapping](https://drive.google.com/drive/folders/1hLgFgzp0cS_Pi8hpI9zOD7DcY3SUXRNH)
- [Used Ontologies @ NFDI](https://docs.google.com/spreadsheets/d/1UAfDKo2gKiaFldEeitMUcO8Gl1Fjyb_r_bp1V4JW0Es/edit#gid=0)
- [Overview \- WG Ontology Harmonization & Mapping Meetings](https://docs.google.com/document/d/14z6kuAdVaiflWUtjqk3LKt-hqg_DeaRCpLY7TFo1PoU/edit)

**Main Topic:**

- Report on Workgroup Activities for Upcoming Section meeting AND consortia
  assembly
- Discussing next steps, todos & deliverables

# <a id="_4in35gwl6myp"></a>Participants

- Philip Str�mert \(NFDI4Chem\)
- Oliver Koepler \(NFDI4Chem\)
- Jakob Vo� \(NFDI4Objects\)
- Arnost Stanzel \(NFDI4Memory\)
- Hendrik Borgelt \(NFDI4Cat\)
- Dorothea Iglezakis \(NFDI4Ing, MaRDI\)
- Lozana Rossenova \(NFDI4Culture\)
- Naouel Karam \(NFDI4Biodiv\)
- Holger Israel
- Kathryn Dumschott \(NFDI4Plants\)
- Alexander Reis \(NFDI4memory\)

# <a id="_3cakx2qk2ogo"></a>Agenda

**discussed aspect of main topic**

**prepared or present by **

we need a written summary of your activities of the last 6 months \(1/3 page
max\)\.

Philip Str�mert

Discussing next steps, todos & deliverables

# <a id="_t8kz9ak9as8n"></a>Notes

## <a id="_d2xck6dxs8b7"></a>WG report

Points to include may be:

- Number of meetings = 9
- Average Participants = 10
  - there is a gap in the participant list of
    the[ 2023\-02\-21](https://docs.google.com/document/d/15_Os_JWtbCoyS2MYuX6SVIhunMiOvDHYgw2egpleMtc)
    &[ 2023\-05\-10](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1H56_DYPSznnMwBVs20doFkm_HQ5zkXmf7YoGw86TcKU)
    calls
- Average of participating consortia representatives = 7
- Activities, outreach \(publications, surveys, basic service proposal\)
  - submitted an abstract to CoRDI \(I\-ADOPT as a possible common framework\)
  - started an analysis of
    [Used Ontologies @ NFDI](https://docs.google.com/spreadsheets/d/1UAfDKo2gKiaFldEeitMUcO8Gl1Fjyb_r_bp1V4JW0Es)
- Activities, deliverables with regards to WG charter
  - presentations about used terminologies in 4Chem & 4Cat
  - discussions & presentations about upper\-level frameworks \(CIDOC\-CRM,
    EMMO, I\-ADOPT\)
  - presentations about process patterns in 4Ing & OBO
  - drafting informal �mapping�
    [table](https://docs.google.com/spreadsheets/d/1UAfDKo2gKiaFldEeitMUcO8Gl1Fjyb_r_bp1V4JW0Es/edit#gid=1839424810)
    of very general concepts
- Adjustment to work plan, mission etc
  - RE:
    [_Objective_](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1GUh7K0Sy8tyrKZ4-BEizb-9Qa0tt3uzE/edit#heading=h.wj2xmb4q8ovw)_:
    Agree on an upper\-level ontology to support broad semantic interoperability
    among domain\-specific ontologies\._
    - Using one common TLO seems not feasible due to different ontological
      commitments \(e\.g\. humanities vs natural sciences, classical vs quantum
      interpretation\) thus we agreed on rather aligning the common upper and
      general level terminologies as well as providing recommendations for the
      tools and workflows needed for this\.
      - TODO: change in Charter doc but wait for more changes before publishing
        a new version
  - Within our charter, we need to better distinguish our WG objectives from the
    ones of the other related WGs \(Terminology Service, Knowledge Graphs\)\.
    - TODO: need to schedule a call with these WGs to talk about this
- Networking with other WGs, stakeholders
  - We are in close contact with the coordinators of WG Terminology Services and
    the WG Knowledge Graphs to discuss shared technical implementations needed
    for the harmonization and mapping work\.
    - \(not for the report but FYI: Philip talked to Roman Baum \(Terminology
      Services WG\) last week about this see:
      [Terminology Services @ NFDI](https://docs.google.com/spreadsheets/d/1jLXHNuDKbGQBIWds5lDuNKj-GHIqHluEpfF5so5nF8g/edit#gid=908635141)
      \-> to evaluate which NFDI TSs exist &
      [Usage of terminology services @NFDI](https://docs.google.com/spreadsheets/d/1BMT38yvHdxJLEiumydI7dsbZknIewdN9Ooi2ekVfaks/)
      \-> to evaluate which apps use the NFDI TSs\)
  - adding something about planning to work with
    [RDA VSSIG Task Group](https://www.rd-alliance.org/groups/vocabulary-services-interest-group.html)?
  - involvement in SSSOM community
    - WG members participated in the
      [Why Mappings Matter and how to make them FAIR?](https://fair-impact.eu/events/fairimpact-events/why-mappings-matter-and-how-make-them-fair)
      Workshop by the FAIR\-IMPACT project\.
    - making [first steps](https://github.com/gbv/jskos/issues/108) in aligning
      JSKOS and SSSOM
  - further involvement by other WG members?
  - Involvement in the OAEI community with a matching track for Biodiversity
  - ???
- New members from consortia 3rd round\.
  - Jakob Vo� \(NFDI4Objects\)
  - Arnost Stanzel \(NFDI4Memory\)
  - NFDI4Microbiota \(Mja Magel\)
  - �
- Success Stories, Challenges, problems �
  - challenge: evaluating which consortium uses which ontologies \-> need to ID
    relevant contact people
  - challenge: getting a high number of WG call participants for broad
    communication
  - ???

## <a id="_6uwohnokzyyl"></a>next steps

- get the
  [contact spreadsheet](https://docs.google.com/spreadsheets/d/1UAfDKo2gKiaFldEeitMUcO8Gl1Fjyb_r_bp1V4JW0Es/edit#gid=3857951)
  filled out to get organized better
  - we�ll wait until the end of the week for more people to fill this in, and
    will ask consortium leaders for further help
- idea to reevaluate our call timeslots after summer to get more participation
- analyse
  [Used Ontologies @ NFDI](https://docs.google.com/spreadsheets/d/1UAfDKo2gKiaFldEeitMUcO8Gl1Fjyb_r_bp1V4JW0Es)
  - writing scripts to count and visualize?
    - was not addressed in this call, but needs to be addressed soon, so any
      help and suggestions on this front is highly welcome
  - regarding the modularity column \- we need to clarify what is meant by
    modularity
    - Philip: It refers to either formal dependency on other ontologies \(direct
      reuse via importing classes or all of an external ontology\) as well as
      indirect/informal dependencies, as in reusing a modeling pattern without
      importing the terminology that declares this pattern\. The idea was that
      the more we know about how a terminology is embedded in a certain
      framework \(e\.g\. OBO or W3C stack\), the easier it should be to create &
      maintain mappings accordingly\.
      - Philip: I�ve adjusted the column legend to incorporate this aspect, feel
        free to rewrite, if my wording is unclear
  - we need to reevaluate the existing column
    - need of column for skos/owl difference
- Should we use our
  [RocketChat channel](https://all-chat.nfdi.de/channel/section-metadata-wg-onto)
  more frequently?
  - not enough WG members are there yet, so no
- idea: have a 500 words intro of the WG goals to possible new members
  - distillation of the WG objectives/goals for laypersons/domain experts of the
    consortia, so that they know what the WG is about and how they might be able
    to contribute when/where/how
  - should make clear that the main goal is to bring together the
    ontology/terminology experts to be able to agree on common mappings of
    upper\-level and mid\-level terms and on common tools to do the mappings and
    that these experts should then be able to communicate to the domain experts
    how to use these common mappings and tools/workflows
  - first draft:
    [Our WG in a Nutshell](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1TNAMN51ZVxGBSZO8YoxC4pmfh509Wg1iPa4tN_Vzr_E/)
- ???

## <a id="_7ez0q5n11cev"></a>Announcements

- Philip will be on vacation in July, so the calls on the 12th and 25th of July
  will either have to be dropped or moderated by someone else under an
  alternative meeting link\.
