<a id="_5l7hdhn1spdj"></a>2024\-02\-14 \- WG Ontology Mapping & Harmonisation

__Date & Time__: 2024\-02\-14 \- 11\-12 CET

 

__Meeting Link:__

[https://tib\-eu\.webex\.com/tib\-eu\-en/j\.php?MTID=mcd77c9718249ee0fdde541ee7e5b6c88](https://tib-eu.webex.com/tib-eu-en/j.php?MTID=mcd77c9718249ee0fdde541ee7e5b6c88) 

__Ressources:__

- Link to GDrive workspace: [WG Ontology Harmonization and Mapping](https://drive.google.com/drive/folders/1hLgFgzp0cS_Pi8hpI9zOD7DcY3SUXRNH) 
- [Used Ontologies @ NFDI](https://docs.google.com/spreadsheets/d/1UAfDKo2gKiaFldEeitMUcO8Gl1Fjyb_r_bp1V4JW0Es/edit#gid=0)
- [Overview \- WG Ontology Harmonization & Mapping Meetings](https://docs.google.com/document/d/14z6kuAdVaiflWUtjqk3LKt-hqg_DeaRCpLY7TFo1PoU/edit)

__Main Topic:__ xxx

# <a id="_4in35gwl6myp"></a>Participants

__Name__

__NFDI project affiliation\(s\)__

Philip Strömert

Base4NFDI, NFDI4Chem

Hendrik Borgelt

NFDI4Cat, N\.A\.

Josh Moore

NFDI4BIOIMAGE, N\.A\.

L\. Jael Castro

NFDI4DS, N\.A\.

Susanne Kunis

NFDI4BIOIMAGE, N\.A\.

Base4NFDI, N\.A\.

Base4NFDI, N\.A\.

Base4NFDI, N\.A\.

Base4NFDI, N\.A\.

Base4NFDI, N\.A\.

# <a id="_3cakx2qk2ogo"></a>Agenda

__discussed aspect of main topic__

__prepared or present by __

Possible Topic: Discussion on how we want to structure further Meetings

Hendrik Borgelt

Possible Topic: DCAT\-AP, who we can use it for Base services and how it is intended to be used in 4Cat

Hendrik Borgelt

# <a id="_71znd1hi3viy"></a>Notes

for Possible topics:

- as discussed after the last meeting: we might want to discuss how we want to structure your approaches to ontology harmonization with regards to meeting agendas\. We often discuss very different topics from meeting to meeting and therefore not manage to discuss or record the results from previous meetings\. __Therefore my question is do we need another meeting structure or do we need another way to record results\.__
	- If just Philip is preparing > too much work for one and leads to bias \(which might be problematic\)
	- we jump too much from topic to topic > need to be more precise need to have more structure in our WG
	- Jael: our goals although being in the charter there are not used to structure the meetings
		- when we have presentations, we should
- If wanted there can be a short overview on DCAT / DCAT\-AP, however with regards to the previous topic i really would like to first discuss how we want to record and document results\.
	- postponed to another call with more participants
	- fore shadowing: mainly used in 4Cat to describe the dataset provenance but also contains a way for how to describe a dataset’s content with  more domain specific vocabs/ontologies
- Jeal showed interest in preparing for a call that would discuss the use of the most current DataCite MDS ;\) 
- Hendrik:
	- use the first 10 min of each call to upvote the topic for the next call, so it becomes clear who is supposed to do what
- David:
	- presentations should not be too broad in terms of a grand overview but should be more specific in terms of being in line with our objectives, goals
- Josh
	- GDoc is not well enough suited > LinkML community example as better way? using GitHub issues?
		- see [https://github\.com/linkml/linkml/issues/974](https://github.com/linkml/linkml/issues/974) 
		- GH idea supported by Hendrik, Philip, David
			- but the majority would have to like this approach too and we would need to properly describe how to use GH in our context
		- Nice issue 1: [https://github\.com/schemaorg/schemaorg/issues/1](https://github.com/schemaorg/schemaorg/issues/1) 

## <a id="_1f8l04fmowo9"></a>The participants of this meeting will test the GH approach 

- @Cord will set up a WG repo under [https://github\.com/nfdi\-de](https://github.com/nfdi-de/WG)/
- Philip will start a draft repo \(to be moved to the one that Cord sets up\)
- We will go over the Goals and Tasks section of our WG charter together with the proposed topics in the overview GDoc to destill this down to possible “epics” and “subtask” issues, which will hopefully allow a better collaborative organization of our WG
	- good first Epic/issue example could be our discussion around the proper vocabularies to describe the research information of all NFDI datasets \(e\.g\. DCAT vs CERIF vs DataCite …\)
- this GH test will thus already be helpful to structure our next calls, even if we decide to not use this approach in the end
- GH handles needed for the test: 
	- [https://github\.com/Wiljes](https://github.com/Wiljes)
	- [https://github\.com/StroemPhi](https://github.com/StroemPhi)
	- [https://github\.com/dalito/](https://github.com/dalito/)
	- [https://github\.com/HendrikBorgelt](https://github.com/HendrikBorgelt) 
	- [https://github\.com/joshmoore](https://github.com/joshmoore)
	- [https://github\.com/sukunis](https://github.com/sukunis) 

